[Music]
thank you
I mean I said we'd go to the audience
after three quarters of an hour but
that's not going to happen
um
the third part let's let's Leap Forward
so we've gone we've gone back four
billion years we've done the 17th 18
into the 19th century let's get on to
because what I said at the beginning you
are a physician you're a cancer doctor
you you you're in between meeting you
yesterday and today you've been in
contact with labs in New York and in
India where you're actually treating
patients so let's talk about the third
part of verkau's idea that when cells go
wrong this is the ontogeny of of disease
cancer is a cellular disease it is the
unregulated growth of cells
well I mean you know himself saw saw
this he was examining a patient and he
found leukemia in fact named it leukemia
um
cells have an incredible quality which
is that another quality of cells is that
they
start dividing and stop dividing it is
one of the qualities of life whenever I
have graduate students I ask them the
first question I ask my graduate
students is when you cut yourself why
don't you grow a new arm
um like a tree
um and the answer is we know some of the
answer to that question but not all the
answer to the question a wound heals and
continues to heal and when the cells
meet each other they pass signals to
each other to stop dividing and that's
your wound that's healed
um cancer in cancer those signals are
broken through genetic mutations
um and that's the fundamental basis of
cancer we can talk about many many other
features of cancer but the fundamental
base of cancer is a cell where the
normal regulation of cell division has
been disrupted and thereby you're
getting you start getting a cell that
can't stop dividing and keeps dividing
as a consequence of genetic mutations
and cancer as well as you know
incredibly sophisticated and evolving
thing as it's as it's growing a tumor
that becomes the mutations accumulate as
as they grow and spread around the body
and release cells with no purpose other
than to keep growing there's no
foresight in cancer other than to to
make more cells to the detriment of the
of the organism well so cancer in some
ways goes back to your first question
cancer is a distortion of the three
principles of life it's a distortion of
genetics
it's a distortion of Cell Biology and
it's a distortion of evolution
because the cancer cell is always
evolving and because as it evolves
um it becomes it changes mutations
accumulate it it changes its own
characteristics it can co-opt uh uh
properties from normal genes and and
make them properties of cancer etc etc
so it's a fascinating thing that the
disease that is now becoming the disease
that sort of defines our century is
happens to be the disease that sits on
top of disruptions of the three
Universal principles of life
and so fundamental to all aspects of of
biology not we are in just talking about
humans here let's think about therapies
though but you know having established
that cancer is a cellular disease it is
a misfunction of those those principles
we can also utilize we can mutate genes
in cells we can use cell Therapies
in order to cure loads of diseases
including cancers now right so
um I mean the the sum of the prominental
cell therapies and again this is why I
sometimes I just stay up nights in in
because India's 12 hours a week we've
started pioneering cell Therapies in
India
um and I think it's the proudest thing
I've ever done it's the proudest moment
of my life because when I saw the first
child that we saved
um with Cell Therapy
um was a was a 10 year old boy
um so just I'll just tell you this how
it works and then talk a little bit
about that moment but um
the you can use a T Cell T cells are
normal cells that go and kill other
cells and you can genetically reprogram
it outside the body I can take your T
cells draw it out draw them out of your
body genetically reprogram them to kill
your cancer re-inject them in your body
and that now it's called a car T cell
and I won't explain what car stands for
you can just imagine it as a modified
genetically modified weaponized T cell
and we reinfused those T cells in the
body and they go and kill the cancer and
they're actually vastly more effective
than most chemotherapies these are for
patients with relapsed refractory
leukemias and lymphomas and myelomas
blood cancers mostly
um but as I said it was it is by far the
proudest moment of my life when when
this boy who was had relapsed refractory
leukemia 10 years old came alive uh with
his his car T cells and is that is that
type of therapy is that only for blood
cancer of which there are many yes so
right now for reasons we don't fully
understand
um these T cells don't seem to like
going and killing solid tumors which are
also which are which are the majority of
tumors even though there are many blood
cancers
um and we don't know exactly why we have
some clues why but one of the scariest
images I've ever seen in my life is a
solid tumor with a ring of activated T
cells all around it but those T cells
for some reason can't penetrate these
solid tumors make substances that
somehow prevent the access to T cells I
guess the bigger question just to carry
on the Riff on this theme a little bit
um is this idea of the new human and
that's a very provocative idea in this
title it's called the exploration of
medicine and the new human and and what
I'm trying to convey in that is that the
new human is not a sort of sci-fi
infrared equipped
um character with prosthetics and and
and and vision you know what I say uh
Keanu Reeves and a black MooMoo
um that's not the new humans the new
human is a human that we're building
prosthetically in some ways which sells
either their own cells that have been
genetically engineered or cells that
we've borrowed from other bodies as in a
bone marrow transplant there's an
incredible example here of a
psychiatrist a woman in New York who's
been pioneering and other people have
two placing electrodes into the brain
very deep into the brain these
electrodes are thinner than human hair
and finding exact spot where certain
nerve cells are responsible going back
to work out for devastating neurological
diseases like Parkinson's but in her in
her case depression
um and when she turns the current on
these neurons these nerve cells respond
and and you get some people get relief
from really recalcitant depression
things that no drug and no therapy works
um so these are examples of of what I
call new humans these are people that
are are that are walking amongst us
someone with someone carrying a bone
marrow from someone else's body is
walking amongst us today someone
carrying electrodes will start walking
amongst us and that's because we are
built having the capacity The Joint
capacity
of genetic engineering and cellular
engineering has created the ability to
create what I call the new human
mix as well is fascinating you talk in
the book book about how
women exclusively women often mostly
carry the cells of either
unknown pregnancies or pregnancies that
have resulted in in births and those
cells of the child
just float around their bodies or they
sometimes they land and do things and
actually you know looking over the
audience many of you will be carrying
the cells of someone who is not to you
actually only the women if you're a man
and carrying those cells you need to go
to the doctor
but isn't that again just a you know a
crazy idea which which he sort of posts
that 19th century bubble of of Discovery
but that's right in fact there are three
papers today in nature open Nature this
morning the three papers in nature back
to back that finally describe and that's
why it's not in the book because it was
published yesterday uh that finally
describe how and why we can live with
all these microbiota in our in our guts
because if T cells are there to
recognize and B cells are there to
recognize pathogens then why aren't we
constantly eliminating all the bugs that
live inside us which are really
important for us important for our
digestion our you know so many functions
now coming out and outnumber yeah
exactly and and what was amazing about
it is that until this morning we didn't
know
so the second edition of the song of the
cell will be out soon with that added to
it that's right twice as thick twice as
thick and you could write again yeah
yeah exactly exactly okay I am going to
open it up to questions now so you can
bring the lights up uh so rules for
questions these are my rules
um so put your hand up questions are
short sentences that end with an upwards
inflection
and Rule is and this is based on
published research this is not me being
politically correct but if in question
and answer sessions women ask questions
first then more women ask questions but
if men ask questions first then women
tend not to so we'll take questions from
women and men alternating your first and
the third rule is try not to be mad
Mind Body Connection I mean there's a
lot of talk about possible cancer coming
from childhood trauma and from actual
thoughts what are your thoughts on that
yeah I'm not a believer in it at all
um I don't think the cancer comes from
trauma I think uh people uh were
traumatized have a hard time dealing
with cancer in the sense that they often
don't they can
um ignore it they can have problems with
it but um I don't think that that trauma
can in any way directly affect our our
genetics now there's one caveat to that
which is that that
um there is a strong relationship
between inflammation and cancer very
well established and a strong
relationship also between inflammation
and stress similarly well established
the word stress is a meaningless word it
means something to you it means
something else to us but when I'm
talking about stress and I'm talking
about stress as inflammation I do think
that there's a relationship between
inflammation and cancer so if that's the
lineage you're following I think there's
a there's something very productive
there
um but again the word trauma is that
means different things to different
people it has no meaning to geneticists
um and so
um so I don't think that that's the
reason for for cancer
okay question for okay I'm gonna dot
around the room so let's go uh you you
you and you there's four okay
so second one hit this gentleman in the
third row okay uh thank you
um my question was around I'm curious
when you're researching this book
what was the evolution of you know when
you talk about these the idea of Cell
Biology you know going back to this one
cell Luca
um how did this evolve in concert or
that was perhaps stymied by a religious
thought at the time you know this is
happening well so can you repeat the
question the question was how is the
what is the intersection between this
and between the evolution of cellular
biology and religious thought
um well vitalism was very important in
in religious thought and spontaneous
generation is also very important in
religious thought
um and so
um both survivalism claims that you have
this vital fluid but it's special
um and in fact that vital fluid comes to
you from God
um at least one school of vitalists
believe that not all white lists um and
um and spontaneous generation is similar
um in the sense that you are generated
spontaneously and similarly cells are
generated spontaneously
um the the the
interesting thing about cell theory
unlike Evolution and to some extent on
like genetics
cell theory
doesn't didn't violate at least
fundamentally Christian principles
and therefore was allowed to evolve I
mean if you read the history it was
allowed to evolve quite independently
once that vitalism and and spontaneous
generation were sort of set aside and it
was only much much later than they they
began to intersect with with religion
again I'll give you one example of that
and there are many
um it's much later when you have IVF
and you now have genetic engineering of
potentially of human babies that all of
a sudden embryonic stem cells much much
later years almost a century later when
when then when when religion all of a
sudden wakes up and says wait a second
so it's very unlike Evolution or at
least Darwin's idea of evolution and
neo-dargonism etc etc which did have a
much more conflicting relationship with
with religion
yeah
um yes I was thinking I could comment on
that but I won't
um well I mean obviously I think I'm not
disagreeing with you at all I think I
think one of the things one of the
relationships one of the ways we
characterize religion in this
relationship with science is I think
often is a sort of false dichotomy but
actually religions are very
um tend to be specifically
judea-christian religions tend to be
quite fluid in the way that they bounce
in and out of scientific ideas and there
was much less resistance to darwinian
thinking than is often perceived in the
1850s and 60s and it's only really 50
years later that that fundamentalists in
America primarily become regards
evolution by natural selection is as
problematic with with cells
what Sid just said is absolutely correct
but what I was thinking is that the
injection of the Soul into the into the
fertilized egg occurs at multiple times
depending on which religion you're a
member of and how that religion has
changed over time and so as for example
um Christians become more fundamental in
America the in solidification what's the
word not in solarification
let's go with internifications
occurs at at fertilization and that's
new that's a that's a new description
that is really less than you know 40
years old so religion is much more
flexible than than doctrinal
um so so those relationships are always
always changing that was just what I was
thinking as you were answering anyway